In the fight against the COVID-19, we know that social distancing has proven to be a very effective measure. To ensure social distancing protocol in public places and workplace, we wanted to develop social distancing detection tool that can monitor if people are keeping a safe distance or not.

We are in our way to detect humans and we want to develop this code in python as we both are very familiar with it. As shown in the figure, there are true and false samples here to detect a human. We are now working with this using opencv library in python.  

Yolo V3 is the latest variant of a popular object detection algorithm you only look once(yolo). As it is super fast and nearly as accurate as SDD(single shot detector).

In real time, the ovverview would work as shown in the figure.


* Detect humans in the frame with yolov3.
* Calculates the distance between every human who is detected in the frame.

A. Workflow
This section includes the necessary steps undertaken to
compose a framework for monitoring social distancing.
1. Fine-tune the trained object detection model to identify
and track the person in a footage.
2. The trained model is feeded with the surveillance footage.
The model generates a set of bounding boxes and an ID
for each identified person.
3. Each individual is associated with three-dimensional feature space (x, y, d), where (x, y) corresponds to the
centroid coordinates of the bounding box and d defines
the depth of the individual as observed from the camera.
d = ((2 ∗ 3.14 ∗ 180)/(w + h ∗ 360) ∗ 1000 + 3) (16)
where w is the width of the bounding box and h is the
height of the bounding box [83].
4. For the set of bounding boxes, pairwise L2 norm is
computed as given by the following equation.
||D||2 =
vuutXn
i=1
(qi − pi)
2
(17)
where in this work n = 3.
5. The dense matrix of L2 norm is then utilized to assign the
neighbors for each individual that satisfies the closeness
sensitivity. With extensive trials the closeness threshold
is updated dynamically based on the spatial location of
the person in a given frame ranging between (90, 170)
pixels.
6. Any individual that meets the closeness property is
assigned a neighbour or neighbours forming a group
represented in a different color coding in contrast to other
people.
7. The formation of groups indicates the violation of the
practice of social distancing which is quantified with help
of the following:
– Consider ng as number of groups or clusters identified, and np as total number of people found in close
proximity.
– vi = np/ng, where vi
is the violation index